 There were four walls, a floor and a roof, which made one room; and this room
contained a rusty looking cookstove, a cupboard for the dishes, a table, three
or four chairs, and the beds. There was no garret at all, and no cellar—except
a small hole dug in the ground, called a cyclone cellar, where the family could
go in case one of those great whirlwinds arose, mighty enough to crush any
building in its path. It was reached by a trap door in the middle of the floor,
from which a ladder led down into the small, dark hole. When Dorothy stood in
the doorway and looked around, she could see nothing but the great gray prairie
on every side. When Dorothy, who was an orphan, first came to her, Aunt Em had
been so startled by the child's laughter that she would scream and press her
hand upon her heart whenever Dorothy's merry voice reached her ears; and she
still looked at the little girl with wonder that she could find anything to
laugh at. He was gray also, from his long beard to his rough boots, and he
looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke. It was Toto that made Dorothy laugh,
and saved her from growing as gray as her other surroundings. Toto was not gray;
he was a little black dog, with long silky hair and small black eyes that
twinkled merrily on either side of his funny, wee nose. Toto played all day
long, and Dorothy played with him, and loved him dearly. Uncle Henry sat upon
the doorstep and looked anxiously at the sky, which was even grayer than usual.
Dorothy stood in the door with Toto in her arms, and looked at the sky too. From
the far north they heard a low wail of the wind, and Uncle Henry and Dorothy
could see where the long grass bowed in waves before the coming storm. Toto
jumped out of Dorothy's arms and hid under the bed, and the girl started to get
him. Aunt Em, badly frightened, threw open the trap door in the floor and
climbed down the ladder into the small, dark hole. Dorothy caught Toto at last
and started to follow her aunt. When she was halfway across the room there came
a great shriek from the wind, and the house shook so hard that she lost her
footing and sat down suddenly upon the floor. In the middle of a cyclone the air
is generally still, but the great pressure of the wind on every side of the
house raised it up higher and higher, until it was at the very top of the
cyclone; and there it remained and was carried miles and miles away as easily as
you could carry a feather. After the first few whirls around, and one other time
when the house tipped badly, she felt as if she were being rocked gently, like a
baby in a cradle. He ran about the room, now here, now there, barking loudly;
but Dorothy sat quite still on the floor and waited to see what would happen.
Once Toto got too near the open trap door, and fell in; and at first the little
girl thought she had lost him. But soon she saw one of his ears sticking up
through the hole, for the strong pressure of the air was keeping him up so that
he could not fall. She crept to the hole, caught Toto by the ear, and dragged
him into the room again, afterward closing the trap door so that no more
accidents could happen. Hour after hour passed away, and slowly Dorothy got over
her fright; but she felt quite lonely, and the wind shrieked so loudly all about
her that she nearly became deaf. At first she had wondered if she would be
dashed to pieces when the house fell again; but as the hours passed and nothing
terrible happened, she stopped worrying and resolved to wait calmly and see what
the future would bring. At last she crawled over the swaying floor to her bed,
and lay down upon it; and Toto followed and lay down beside her. In spite of the
swaying of the house and the wailing of the wind, Dorothy soon closed her eyes
and fell fast asleep. As it was, the jar made her catch her breath and wonder
what had happened; and Toto put his cold little nose into her face and whined
dismally. Dorothy sat up and noticed that the house was not moving; nor was it
dark, for the bright sunshine came in at the window, flooding the little room.
She sprang from her bed and with Toto at her heels ran and opened the door. The
little girl gave a cry of amazement and looked about her, her eyes growing
bigger and bigger at the wonderful sights she saw. A little way off was a small
brook, rushing and sparkling along between green banks, and murmuring in a voice
very grateful to a little girl who had lived so long on the dry, gray prairies.
Her face was covered with wrinkles, her hair was nearly white, and she walked
rather stiffly. When these people drew near the house where Dorothy was standing
in the doorway, they paused and whispered among themselves, as if afraid to come
farther.